Section 5.4: Sketching Graphs. Let's learn how
to identify key features and sketch functions.
Every graph has key features you should label:
intercepts. vertices. and asymptotes. Let's identify them.
The y-intercept is where the graph crosses the
y-axis. Here it's at 0 comma 2.
The x-intercepts are where the graph crosses the x-axis.
The vertex is the highest or lowest point. This
parabola has a maximum at 1 comma 3.
A vertical asymptote occurs where the denominator equals zero. For f of x equals
2 over x minus 3. the denominator is zero when x equals 3.
Watch how the graph shoots off towards positive
and negative infinity near x equals 3.
The vertical asymptote is the dashed red line at x equals
3. The graph gets closer and closer but never touches it.
Case 1: when numerator and denominator have the same
degree. the horizontal asymptote is the ratio of leading
coefficients. Here. y equals 3 over 2.
Case 2: when the numerator has a lower degree than
the denominator. the horizontal asymptote is always y equals 0.
Case 3: when the numerator has a
higher degree. there is no horizontal asymptote.
To find where two graphs intersect. set them equal to each other. Here
we have y equals negative x squared and y equals 2x minus 1.
Set negative x squared equal to 2x minus 1. Rearrange to
get x squared plus 2x minus 1 equals 0. Using the
quadratic formula. x equals negative 1 plus or minus root 2.
In optimization problems. we find the vertex of a
parabola. Here. profit P depends on quantity q.
The profit function is a downward-opening parabola.
The vertex is at q equals 235 with a maximum profit of 684 dollars
and 50 cents. This is found using q equals negative b over 2a.
IB exam tip: follow a systematic checklist when sketching.
Step 1: find vertical asymptotes. Step 2: find horizontal
asymptotes using the degree rule. Step 3: find the
intercepts. Step 4: connect everything into a smooth curve.